Now that we've talked about
collect and reduce, let's
take a step back and compare
and contrast these two terminal
operations because they
have some things in common,
but they also have some
important differences.
So terminal operations produce
the results in different ways.
Now, for sequential streams,
it's not really a big deal.
But for parallel streams
as we'll cover later,
it's a really big deal
whether you use collect
or you use reduce.
But for right now,
we're just going
to talk about their
properties and not
worry too much about the
parallelism aspects, which
will be covered shortly.
So the two key ways in
which they differ is reduce
creates something known
as an immutable value.
Or it should create something
that's an immutable value.
It's expecting to create
an immutable value.
And that simply means
that once it's created,
it's not going to be changed.
It's only going to be read.
So here's a very simple
example to illustrate this.
This is the
factorial method that
uses a stream to compute the
nth factorial using reduce.
And I've kind of visualized
this a little bit
just to make it somewhat
easier to get your head around.
So we're going to start out by
using the rangeClosed method
on the LongStream interface.
So LongStream, of course, is
a specialization of stream
that works for longs.
And rangeClosed will generate a
stream of longs from one to n.
So just to make this simple,
let's say we give n to be 4.
So on the right-hand
side, you can
see we start out with a
range of longs from 1 to 4.
Then what happens is the
reductions take place.
And so the code that
you see in red here,
which is reduce open paren
1 comma open paren a comma b
closed paren arrow
a times b, that
is the lambda expression
that's passed in to reduce.
I'm going to visualize what
actually happened step by step.
And so what reduce
is going to do
is it's going to walk
through that range of longs.
And it's going to combine
two immutable values,
in this case by
multiplying them,
to produce a new immutable
value, which is the result.
So as you can see here,
the way this works
is we start out with the value
1 because that was passed in
is the seed value, the
initial value for reduce.
And then we multiply 1
by 1, which equals 1.
And then we multiply that
value 1 by the next element
in the stream, which is 2.
And that yields 3, and
then we multiply the 3
by the next value in the stream.
And so 2 times 3
is going to be 6.
And then we're
going to multiply 6
by the next value in
the stream, which is 4
and we'll end up with 24.
So you can see how these things
just kind of work through one
at a time, taking the values
and multiplying them together,
this particular
example, of course,
being a sequential
implementation, as opposed
to a parallel implementation.
So that's effectively
how reduce works.
And as you can see, at
every step along the way,
the values that are
created are immutable.
They're only read and used
for the next processing
phase in the stream for reduce.
In contrast, collect
mutates an existing value.
So let's take a look
at another example.
This is actually a fairly
interesting example
that we're going to see to
illustrate how mutable result
containers are
used with collect.
This particular example
is in my ex14 folder
in the GitHub repository.
And what we're
going to do here is
we're going to create a
set of all the unique words
in the works of Shakespeare.
For some reason, I'm
a big Shakespeare fan.
So lots of my examples work
on works of Shakespeare
if for no other reason that
I can get open source access
to all the text of the
works of Shakespeare.
And it's fairly large, some
800,000 words I believe.
So it gives us something
interesting to process
and do text analysis on.
So in this particular
case, we're
going to end up ultimately with
a set of strings or character
sequences, which are the
unique words in Shakespeare.
Here's how this works.
We're first going to call
this method called getInput.
And all that thing
does is it opens up
a file, which in this case
contains the complete works
of Shakespeare.
And it splits that
file up by word.
So we're going to end up with
basically a list of words
that correspond to all
the words in Shakespeare.
This is not taking into
account duplicates.
It's just all the
words in Shakespeare.
We then go ahead and
convert that list
of words of Shakespeare into a
stream of words of Shakespeare.
And then we're going to go ahead
and lowercase all the words.
So we're going to
take each word.
We're going to
convert it to a string
because it comes in as
a character sequence.
And then we're going to
lowercase that string.
So the result of
this map operation
is now a stream of lowercased,
potentially duplicated versions
of words in Shakespeare.
And the last thing
we're going to do
is we're going to go ahead
and collect this whole stream
into a collection.
And the particular collection
we're going to use here
will be a HashSet.
And a HashSet, as
you may know, is
going to have unique
keys because it's a set.
So sets have no duplicates.
It just happens
to be a set that's
implemented as a hash table.
We could obviously also use
a tree set here as well.
It wouldn't change the
analysis that we're doing.
So what we're doing here is
we're accumulating the stream
elements into it.
And what we end up with
at the end of all this
will be a set of unique words.
Now, the thing to note
is as this program
is running, what we're
doing is we're accumulating
the elements in the stream
into this HashSet, which
is known as the mutable
result container.
And when we talk a
little bit further
about collectors
in detail, you'll
see why it's called that.
But basically, it's updating
the HashSet every time
a new element is added to it.
And that's very different from
reduce, which would simply
create immutable values and
then do something to them,
like multiply them, or add
them, or something, in order
to be able to end up
with a single value
when everything was finished.